docs/src/main/sphinx/client/jdbc.md, before:

# JDBC driver

The Trino [JDBC driver](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/JDBC_driver) allows
users to access Trino using Java-based applications, and other non-Java
applications running in a JVM. Both desktop and server-side applications, such
as those used for reporting and database development, use the JDBC driver.

## Requirements

The Trino JDBC driver has the following requirements:

- Java version 8 or higher.
- All users that connect to Trino with the JDBC driver must be granted access to
  query tables in the `system.jdbc` schema.

The JDBC driver version should be identical to the version of the Trino cluster,
or newer. Older versions typically work, but only a subset is regularly tested.
Versions before 350 are not supported.

## Installing

Download {maven_download}`jdbc` and add it to the classpath of your Java application.

The driver is also available from Maven Central:

```{eval-rst}
.. parsed-literal::

    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.trino</groupId>
        <artifactId>trino-jdbc</artifactId>
        <version>\ |version|\ </version>
    </dependency>
```

We recommend using the latest version of the JDBC driver. A list of all
available versions can be found in the [Maven Central Repository](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/trino/trino-jdbc/). Navigate to the
directory for the desired version, and select the `trino-jdbc-xxx.jar` file
to download, where `xxx` is the version number.

Once downloaded, you must add the JAR file to a directory in the classpath
of users on systems where they will access Trino.

After you have downloaded the JDBC driver and added it to your
classpath, you'll typically need to restart your application in order to
recognize the new driver. Then, depending on your application, you
may need to manually register and configure the driver.

The CLI uses the HTTP protocol and the
{doc}`Trino client REST API </develop/client-protocol>` to communicate
with Trino.

## Registering and configuring the driver

Drivers are commonly loaded automatically by applications once they are added to
its classpath. If your application does not, such as is the case for some
GUI-based SQL editors, read this section. The steps to register the JDBC driver
in a UI or on the command line depend upon the specific application you are
using. Please check your application's documentation.

Once registered, you must also configure the connection information as described
in the following section.

## Connecting

When your driver is loaded, registered and configured, you are ready to connect
to Trino from your application. The following JDBC URL formats are supported:

```text
jdbc:trino://host:port
jdbc:trino://host:port/catalog
jdbc:trino://host:port/catalog/schema
```

The following is an example of a JDBC URL used to create a connection:

```text
jdbc:trino://example.net:8080/hive/sales
```

This example JDBC URL locates a Trino instance running on port `8080` on
`example.net`, with the catalog `hive` and the schema `sales` defined.

:::{note}
Typically, the JDBC driver classname is configured automatically by your
client. If it is not, use `io.trino.jdbc.TrinoDriver` wherever a driver
classname is required.
:::

(jdbc-java-connection)=

## Connection parameters

The driver supports various parameters that may be set as URL parameters,
or as properties passed to `DriverManager`. Both of the following
examples are equivalent:

```java
// properties
String url = "jdbc:trino://example.net:8080/hive/sales";
Properties properties = new Properties();
properties.setProperty("user", "test");
properties.setProperty("password", "secret");
properties.setProperty("SSL", "true");
Connection connection = DriverManager.getConnection(url, properties);

// URL parameters
String url = "jdbc:trino://example.net:8443/hive/sales?user=test&password=secret&SSL=true";
Connection connection = DriverManager.getConnection(url);
```

These methods may be mixed; some parameters may be specified in the URL,
while others are specified using properties. However, the same parameter
may not be specified using both methods.

(jdbc-parameter-reference)=

## Parameter reference

```{eval-rst}
.. list-table::
   :widths: 35, 65
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - ``user``
     - Username to use for authentication and authorization.
   * - ``password``
     - Password to use for LDAP authentication.
   * - ``sessionUser``
     - Session username override, used for impersonation.
   * - ``socksProxy``
     - SOCKS proxy host and port. Example: ``localhost:1080``
   * - ``httpProxy``
     - HTTP proxy host and port. Example: ``localhost:8888``
   * - ``clientInfo``
     - Extra information about the client.
   * - ``clientTags``
     - Client tags for selecting resource groups. Example: ``abc,xyz``
   * - ``traceToken``
     - Trace token for correlating requests across systems.
   * - ``source``
     - Source name for the Trino query. This parameter should be used in
       preference to ``ApplicationName``. Thus, it takes precedence over
       ``ApplicationName`` and/or ``applicationNamePrefix``.
   * - ``applicationNamePrefix``
     - Prefix to append to any specified ``ApplicationName`` client info
       property, which is used to set the source name for the Trino query if the
       ``source`` parameter has not been set. If neither this property nor
       ``ApplicationName`` or ``source`` are set, the source name for the query
       is ``trino-jdbc``.
   * - ``accessToken``
     - :doc:`JWT </security/jwt>` access token for token based authentication.
   * - ``SSL``
     - Set ``true`` to specify using TLS/HTTPS for connections.
   * - ``SSLVerification``
     - The method of TLS verification. There are three modes: ``FULL``
       (default), ``CA`` and ``NONE``. For ``FULL``, the normal TLS verification
       is performed. For ``CA``, only the CA is verified but hostname mismatch
       is allowed. For ``NONE``, there is no verification.
   * - ``SSLKeyStorePath``
     - Use only when connecting to a Trino cluster that has :doc:`certificate
       authentication </security/certificate>` enabled. Specifies the path to a
       :doc:`PEM </security/inspect-pem>` or :doc:`JKS </security/inspect-jks>`
       file, which must contain a certificate that is trusted by the Trino
       cluster you connect to.
   * - ``SSLKeyStorePassword``
     - The password for the KeyStore, if any.
   * - ``SSLKeyStoreType``
     - The type of the KeyStore. The default type is provided by the Java
       ``keystore.type`` security property or ``jks`` if none exists.
   * - ``SSLTrustStorePath``
     - The location of the Java TrustStore file to use to validate HTTPS server
       certificates.
   * - ``SSLTrustStorePassword``
     - The password for the TrustStore.
   * - ``SSLTrustStoreType``
     - The type of the TrustStore. The default type is provided by the Java
       ``keystore.type`` security property or ``jks`` if none exists.
   * - ``SSLUseSystemTrustStore``
     - Set ``true`` to automatically use the system TrustStore based on the
       operating system. The supported OSes are Windows and macOS. For Windows,
       the ``Windows-ROOT`` TrustStore is selected. For macOS, the
       ``KeychainStore`` TrustStore is selected. For other OSes, the default
       Java TrustStore is loaded. The TrustStore specification can be overridden
       using ``SSLTrustStoreType``.
   * - ``hostnameInCertificate``
     - Expected hostname in the certificate presented by the Trino server. Only
        applicable with full SSL verification enabled.
   * - ``KerberosRemoteServiceName``
     - Trino coordinator Kerberos service name. This parameter is required for
       Kerberos authentication.
   * - ``KerberosPrincipal``
     - The principal to use when authenticating to the Trino coordinator.
   * - ``KerberosUseCanonicalHostname``
     - Use the canonical hostname of the Trino coordinator for the Kerberos
       service principal by first resolving the hostname to an IP address and
       then doing a reverse DNS lookup for that IP address. This is enabled by
       default.
   * - ``KerberosServicePrincipalPattern``
     - Trino coordinator Kerberos service principal pattern. The default is
       ``${SERVICE}@${HOST}``. ``${SERVICE}`` is replaced with the value of
       ``KerberosRemoteServiceName`` and ``${HOST}`` is replaced with the
       hostname of the coordinator (after canonicalization if enabled).
   * - ``KerberosConfigPath``
     - Kerberos configuration file.
   * - ``KerberosKeytabPath``
     - Kerberos keytab file.
   * - ``KerberosCredentialCachePath``
     - Kerberos credential cache.
   * - ``KerberosDelegation``
     - Set to ``true`` to use the token from an existing Kerberos context. This
       allows client to use Kerberos authentication without passing the Keytab
       or credential cache. Defaults to ``false``.
   * - ``extraCredentials``
     - Extra credentials for connecting to external services, specified as a
       list of key-value pairs. For example, ``foo:bar;abc:xyz`` creates the
       credential named ``abc`` with value ``xyz`` and the credential named
       ``foo`` with value ``bar``.
   * - ``roles``
     - Authorization roles to use for catalogs, specified as a list of key-value
       pairs for the catalog and role. For example,
       ``catalog1:roleA;catalog2:roleB`` sets ``roleA`` for ``catalog1`` and
       ``roleB`` for ``catalog2``.
   * - ``sessionProperties``
     - Session properties to set for the system and for catalogs, specified as a
       list of key-value pairs. For example, ``abc:xyz;example.foo:bar`` sets
       the system property ``abc`` to the value ``xyz`` and the ``foo`` property
       for catalog ``example`` to the value ``bar``.
   * - ``externalAuthentication``
     - Set to true if you want to use external authentication via
       :doc:`/security/oauth2`. Use a local web browser to authenticate with an
       identity provider (IdP) that has been configured for the Trino
       coordinator.
   * - ``externalAuthenticationTokenCache``
     - Allows the sharing of external authentication tokens between different
       connections for the same authenticated user until the cache is
       invalidated, such as when a client is restarted or when the classloader
       reloads the JDBC driver. This is disabled by default, with a value of
       ``NONE``. To enable, set the value to ``MEMORY``. If the JDBC driver is
       used in a shared mode by different users, the first registered token is
       stored and authenticates all users.
   * - ``disableCompression``
     -  Whether compression should be enabled.
   * - ``assumeLiteralUnderscoreInMetadataCallsForNonConformingClients``
     - When enabled, the name patterns passed to ``DatabaseMetaData`` methods are
        treated as underscores. You can use this as a workaround for
        applications that do not escape schema or table names when passing them
        to ``DatabaseMetaData`` methods as schema or table name patterns.
```

Commit message:

Add support for timezone parameter to JDBC driver

docs/src/main/sphinx/client/jdbc.md, after:

# JDBC driver

The Trino [JDBC driver](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/JDBC_driver) allows
users to access Trino using Java-based applications, and other non-Java
applications running in a JVM. Both desktop and server-side applications, such
as those used for reporting and database development, use the JDBC driver.

## Requirements

The Trino JDBC driver has the following requirements:

- Java version 8 or higher.
- All users that connect to Trino with the JDBC driver must be granted access to
  query tables in the `system.jdbc` schema.

The JDBC driver version should be identical to the version of the Trino cluster,
or newer. Older versions typically work, but only a subset is regularly tested.
Versions before 350 are not supported.

## Installing

Download {maven_download}`jdbc` and add it to the classpath of your Java application.

The driver is also available from Maven Central:

```{eval-rst}
.. parsed-literal::

    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.trino</groupId>
        <artifactId>trino-jdbc</artifactId>
        <version>\ |version|\ </version>
    </dependency>
```

We recommend using the latest version of the JDBC driver. A list of all
available versions can be found in the [Maven Central Repository](https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/trino/trino-jdbc/). Navigate to the
directory for the desired version, and select the `trino-jdbc-xxx.jar` file
to download, where `xxx` is the version number.

Once downloaded, you must add the JAR file to a directory in the classpath
of users on systems where they will access Trino.

After you have downloaded the JDBC driver and added it to your
classpath, you'll typically need to restart your application in order to
recognize the new driver. Then, depending on your application, you
may need to manually register and configure the driver.

The CLI uses the HTTP protocol and the
{doc}`Trino client REST API </develop/client-protocol>` to communicate
with Trino.

## Registering and configuring the driver

Drivers are commonly loaded automatically by applications once they are added to
its classpath. If your application does not, such as is the case for some
GUI-based SQL editors, read this section. The steps to register the JDBC driver
in a UI or on the command line depend upon the specific application you are
using. Please check your application's documentation.

Once registered, you must also configure the connection information as described
in the following section.

## Connecting

When your driver is loaded, registered and configured, you are ready to connect
to Trino from your application. The following JDBC URL formats are supported:

```text
jdbc:trino://host:port
jdbc:trino://host:port/catalog
jdbc:trino://host:port/catalog/schema
```

The following is an example of a JDBC URL used to create a connection:

```text
jdbc:trino://example.net:8080/hive/sales
```

This example JDBC URL locates a Trino instance running on port `8080` on
`example.net`, with the catalog `hive` and the schema `sales` defined.

:::{note}
Typically, the JDBC driver classname is configured automatically by your
client. If it is not, use `io.trino.jdbc.TrinoDriver` wherever a driver
classname is required.
:::

(jdbc-java-connection)=

## Connection parameters

The driver supports various parameters that may be set as URL parameters,
or as properties passed to `DriverManager`. Both of the following
examples are equivalent:

```java
// properties
String url = "jdbc:trino://example.net:8080/hive/sales";
Properties properties = new Properties();
properties.setProperty("user", "test");
properties.setProperty("password", "secret");
properties.setProperty("SSL", "true");
Connection connection = DriverManager.getConnection(url, properties);

// URL parameters
String url = "jdbc:trino://example.net:8443/hive/sales?user=test&password=secret&SSL=true";
Connection connection = DriverManager.getConnection(url);
```

These methods may be mixed; some parameters may be specified in the URL,
while others are specified using properties. However, the same parameter
may not be specified using both methods.

(jdbc-parameter-reference)=

## Parameter reference

```{eval-rst}
.. list-table::
   :widths: 35, 65
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - ``user``
     - Username to use for authentication and authorization.
   * - ``password``
     - Password to use for LDAP authentication.
   * - ``sessionUser``
     - Session username override, used for impersonation.
   * - ``socksProxy``
     - SOCKS proxy host and port. Example: ``localhost:1080``
   * - ``httpProxy``
     - HTTP proxy host and port. Example: ``localhost:8888``
   * - ``clientInfo``
     - Extra information about the client.
   * - ``clientTags``
     - Client tags for selecting resource groups. Example: ``abc,xyz``
   * - ``traceToken``
     - Trace token for correlating requests across systems.
   * - ``source``
     - Source name for the Trino query. This parameter should be used in
       preference to ``ApplicationName``. Thus, it takes precedence over
       ``ApplicationName`` and/or ``applicationNamePrefix``.
   * - ``applicationNamePrefix``
     - Prefix to append to any specified ``ApplicationName`` client info
       property, which is used to set the source name for the Trino query if the
       ``source`` parameter has not been set. If neither this property nor
       ``ApplicationName`` or ``source`` are set, the source name for the query
       is ``trino-jdbc``.
   * - ``accessToken``
     - :doc:`JWT </security/jwt>` access token for token based authentication.
   * - ``SSL``
     - Set ``true`` to specify using TLS/HTTPS for connections.
   * - ``SSLVerification``
     - The method of TLS verification. There are three modes: ``FULL``
       (default), ``CA`` and ``NONE``. For ``FULL``, the normal TLS verification
       is performed. For ``CA``, only the CA is verified but hostname mismatch
       is allowed. For ``NONE``, there is no verification.
   * - ``SSLKeyStorePath``
     - Use only when connecting to a Trino cluster that has :doc:`certificate
       authentication </security/certificate>` enabled. Specifies the path to a
       :doc:`PEM </security/inspect-pem>` or :doc:`JKS </security/inspect-jks>`
       file, which must contain a certificate that is trusted by the Trino
       cluster you connect to.
   * - ``SSLKeyStorePassword``
     - The password for the KeyStore, if any.
   * - ``SSLKeyStoreType``
     - The type of the KeyStore. The default type is provided by the Java
       ``keystore.type`` security property or ``jks`` if none exists.
   * - ``SSLTrustStorePath``
     - The location of the Java TrustStore file to use to validate HTTPS server
       certificates.
   * - ``SSLTrustStorePassword``
     - The password for the TrustStore.
   * - ``SSLTrustStoreType``
     - The type of the TrustStore. The default type is provided by the Java
       ``keystore.type`` security property or ``jks`` if none exists.
   * - ``SSLUseSystemTrustStore``
     - Set ``true`` to automatically use the system TrustStore based on the
       operating system. The supported OSes are Windows and macOS. For Windows,
       the ``Windows-ROOT`` TrustStore is selected. For macOS, the
       ``KeychainStore`` TrustStore is selected. For other OSes, the default
       Java TrustStore is loaded. The TrustStore specification can be overridden
       using ``SSLTrustStoreType``.
   * - ``hostnameInCertificate``
     - Expected hostname in the certificate presented by the Trino server. Only
        applicable with full SSL verification enabled.
   * - ``KerberosRemoteServiceName``
     - Trino coordinator Kerberos service name. This parameter is required for
       Kerberos authentication.
   * - ``KerberosPrincipal``
     - The principal to use when authenticating to the Trino coordinator.
   * - ``KerberosUseCanonicalHostname``
     - Use the canonical hostname of the Trino coordinator for the Kerberos
       service principal by first resolving the hostname to an IP address and
       then doing a reverse DNS lookup for that IP address. This is enabled by
       default.
   * - ``KerberosServicePrincipalPattern``
     - Trino coordinator Kerberos service principal pattern. The default is
       ``${SERVICE}@${HOST}``. ``${SERVICE}`` is replaced with the value of
       ``KerberosRemoteServiceName`` and ``${HOST}`` is replaced with the
       hostname of the coordinator (after canonicalization if enabled).
   * - ``KerberosConfigPath``
     - Kerberos configuration file.
   * - ``KerberosKeytabPath``
     - Kerberos keytab file.
   * - ``KerberosCredentialCachePath``
     - Kerberos credential cache.
   * - ``KerberosDelegation``
     - Set to ``true`` to use the token from an existing Kerberos context. This
       allows client to use Kerberos authentication without passing the Keytab
       or credential cache. Defaults to ``false``.
   * - ``extraCredentials``
     - Extra credentials for connecting to external services, specified as a
       list of key-value pairs. For example, ``foo:bar;abc:xyz`` creates the
       credential named ``abc`` with value ``xyz`` and the credential named
       ``foo`` with value ``bar``.
   * - ``roles``
     - Authorization roles to use for catalogs, specified as a list of key-value
       pairs for the catalog and role. For example,
       ``catalog1:roleA;catalog2:roleB`` sets ``roleA`` for ``catalog1`` and
       ``roleB`` for ``catalog2``.
   * - ``sessionProperties``
     - Session properties to set for the system and for catalogs, specified as a
       list of key-value pairs. For example, ``abc:xyz;example.foo:bar`` sets
       the system property ``abc`` to the value ``xyz`` and the ``foo`` property
       for catalog ``example`` to the value ``bar``.
   * - ``externalAuthentication``
     - Set to true if you want to use external authentication via
       :doc:`/security/oauth2`. Use a local web browser to authenticate with an
       identity provider (IdP) that has been configured for the Trino
       coordinator.
   * - ``externalAuthenticationTokenCache``
     - Allows the sharing of external authentication tokens between different
       connections for the same authenticated user until the cache is
       invalidated, such as when a client is restarted or when the classloader
       reloads the JDBC driver. This is disabled by default, with a value of
       ``NONE``. To enable, set the value to ``MEMORY``. If the JDBC driver is
       used in a shared mode by different users, the first registered token is
       stored and authenticates all users.
   * - ``disableCompression``
     -  Whether compression should be enabled.
   * - ``assumeLiteralUnderscoreInMetadataCallsForNonConformingClients``
     - When enabled, the name patterns passed to ``DatabaseMetaData`` methods are
        treated as underscores. You can use this as a workaround for
        applications that do not escape schema or table names when passing them
        to ``DatabaseMetaData`` methods as schema or table name patterns.
   * - ``timezone``
     - Sets the time zone for the session using the `time zone passed
       <https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/time/ZoneId.html#of(java.lang.String)>`_. Defaults
       to the timezone of the JVM running the JDBC driver.
```
