docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/mariadb.md, before:

---
myst:
  substitutions:
    default_domain_compaction_threshold: '`32`'
---

# MariaDB connector

```{raw} html
<img src="../_static/img/mariadb.png" class="connector-logo">
```

The MariaDB connector allows querying and creating tables in an external MariaDB
database.

## Requirements

To connect to MariaDB, you need:

- MariaDB version 10.2 or higher.
- Network access from the Trino coordinator and workers to MariaDB. Port
  3306 is the default port.

## Configuration

To configure the MariaDB connector, create a catalog properties file in
`etc/catalog` named, for example, `example.properties`, to mount the MariaDB
connector as the `example` catalog. Create the file with the following
contents, replacing the connection properties as appropriate for your setup:

```text
connector.name=mariadb
connection-url=jdbc:mariadb://example.net:3306
connection-user=root
connection-password=secret
```

The `connection-user` and `connection-password` are typically required and
determine the user credentials for the connection, often a service user. You can
use {doc}`secrets </security/secrets>` to avoid actual values in the catalog
properties files.

```{include} jdbc-authentication.fragment
```

```{include} jdbc-common-configurations.fragment
```

```{include} jdbc-domain-compaction-threshold.fragment
```

```{include} jdbc-case-insensitive-matching.fragment
```

```{include} non-transactional-insert.fragment
```

## Querying MariaDB

The MariaDB connector provides a schema for every MariaDB *database*.
You can see the available MariaDB databases by running `SHOW SCHEMAS`:

```
SHOW SCHEMAS FROM example;
```

If you have a MariaDB database named `web`, you can view the tables
in this database by running `SHOW TABLES`:

```
SHOW TABLES FROM example.web;
```

You can see a list of the columns in the `clicks` table in the `web`
database using either of the following:

```
DESCRIBE example.web.clicks;
SHOW COLUMNS FROM example.web.clicks;
```

Finally, you can access the `clicks` table in the `web` database:

```
SELECT * FROM example.web.clicks;
```

If you used a different name for your catalog properties file, use
that catalog name instead of `example` in the above examples.

% mariadb-type-mapping:

## Type mapping

Because Trino and MariaDB each support types that the other does not, this
connector {ref}`modifies some types <type-mapping-overview>` when reading or
writing data. Data types may not map the same way in both directions between
Trino and the data source. Refer to the following sections for type mapping in
each direction.

### MariaDB type to Trino type mapping

The connector maps MariaDB types to the corresponding Trino types according
to the following table:

```{eval-rst}
.. list-table:: MariaDB type to Trino type mapping
  :widths: 30, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - MariaDB type
    - Trino type
    - Notes
  * - ``BOOLEAN``
    - ``TINYINT``
    - ``BOOL`` and ``BOOLEAN`` are aliases of ``TINYINT(1)``
  * - ``TINYINT``
    - ``TINYINT``
    -
  * - ``TINYINT UNSIGNED``
    - ``SMALLINT``
    -
  * - ``SMALLINT``
    - ``SMALLINT``
    -
  * - ``SMALLINT UNSIGNED``
    - ``INTEGER``
    -
  * - ``INT``
    - ``INTEGER``
    -
  * - ``INT UNSIGNED``
    - ``BIGINT``
    -
  * - ``BIGINT``
    - ``BIGINT``
    -
  * - ``BIGINT UNSIGNED``
    - ``DECIMAL(20, 0)``
    -
  * - ``FLOAT``
    - ``REAL``
    -
  * - ``DOUBLE``
    - ``DOUBLE``
    -
  * - ``DECIMAL(p,s)``
    - ``DECIMAL(p,s)``
    -
  * - ``CHAR(n)``
    - ``CHAR(n)``
    -
  * - ``TINYTEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR(255)``
    -
  * - ``TEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR(65535)``
    -
  * - ``MEDIUMTEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR(16777215)``
    -
  * - ``LONGTEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR``
    -
  * - ``VARCHAR(n)``
    - ``VARCHAR(n)``
    -
  * - ``TINYBLOB``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``BLOB``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``MEDIUMBLOB``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``LONGBLOB``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``VARBINARY(n)``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``DATE``
    - ``DATE``
    -
  * - ``TIME(n)``
    - ``TIME(n)``
    -
  * - ``TIMESTAMP(n)``
    - ``TIMESTAMP(n)``
    - MariaDB stores the current timestamp by default. Enable
      `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp
      <https://mariadb.com/docs/reference/mdb/system-variables/explicit_defaults_for_timestamp/>`_
      to avoid implicit default values and use ``NULL`` as the default value.
```

No other types are supported.

### Trino type mapping to MariaDB type mapping

The connector maps Trino types to the corresponding MariaDB types according
to the following table:

```{eval-rst}
.. list-table:: Trino type mapping to MariaDB type mapping
  :widths: 30, 25, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Trino type
    - MariaDB type
    - Notes
  * - ``BOOLEAN``
    - ``BOOLEAN``
    -
  * - ``TINYINT``
    - ``TINYINT``
    -
  * - ``SMALLINT``
    - ``SMALLINT``
    -
  * - ``INTEGER``
    - ``INT``
    -
  * - ``BIGINT``
    - ``BIGINT``
    -
  * - ``REAL``
    - ``FLOAT``
    -
  * - ``DOUBLE``
    - ``DOUBLE``
    -
  * - ``DECIMAL(p,s)``
    - ``DECIMAL(p,s)``
    -
  * - ``CHAR(n)``
    - ``CHAR(n)``
    -
  * - ``VARCHAR(255)``
    - ``TINYTEXT``
    - Maps on ``VARCHAR`` of length 255 or less.
  * - ``VARCHAR(65535)``
    - ``TEXT``
    - Maps on ``VARCHAR`` of length between 256 and 65535, inclusive.
  * - ``VARCHAR(16777215)``
    - ``MEDIUMTEXT``
    - Maps on ``VARCHAR`` of length between 65536 and 16777215, inclusive.
  * - ``VARCHAR``
    - ``LONGTEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR`` of length greater than 16777215 and unbounded ``VARCHAR`` map
      to ``LONGTEXT``.
  * - ``VARBINARY``
    - ``MEDIUMBLOB``
    -
  * - ``DATE``
    - ``DATE``
    -
  * - ``TIME(n)``
    - ``TIME(n)``
    -
  * - ``TIMESTAMP(n)``
    - ``TIMESTAMP(n)``
    - MariaDB stores the current timestamp by default. Enable
      `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp
      <https://mariadb.com/docs/reference/mdb/system-variables/explicit_defaults_for_timestamp/>`_
      to avoid implicit default values and use ``NULL`` as the default value.
```

No other types are supported.

Complete list of [MariaDB data types](https://mariadb.com/kb/en/data-types/).

```{include} jdbc-type-mapping.fragment
```

(mariadb-sql-support)=

## SQL support

The connector provides read access and write access to data and metadata in
a MariaDB database.  In addition to the {ref}`globally available
<sql-globally-available>` and {ref}`read operation <sql-read-operations>`
statements, the connector supports the following features:

- {doc}`/sql/insert`
- {doc}`/sql/update`
- {doc}`/sql/delete`
- {doc}`/sql/truncate`
- {doc}`/sql/create-table`
- {doc}`/sql/create-table-as`
- {doc}`/sql/drop-table`
- {doc}`/sql/alter-table`
- {doc}`/sql/create-schema`
- {doc}`/sql/drop-schema`

```{include} sql-update-limitation.fragment
```

```{include} sql-delete-limitation.fragment
```

## Table functions

The connector provides specific {doc}`table functions </functions/table>` to
access MariaDB.

(mariadb-query-function)=

### `query(varchar) -> table`

The `query` function allows you to query the underlying database directly. It
requires syntax native to MariaDB, because the full query is pushed down and
processed in MariaDB. This can be useful for accessing native features which are
not available in Trino or for improving query performance in situations where
running a query natively may be faster.

```{include} query-passthrough-warning.fragment
```

As an example, query the `example` catalog and select the age of employees by
using `TIMESTAMPDIFF` and `CURDATE`:

```
SELECT
  age
FROM
  TABLE(
    example.system.query(
      query => 'SELECT
        TIMESTAMPDIFF(
          YEAR,
          date_of_birth,
          CURDATE()
        ) AS age
      FROM
        tiny.employees'
    )
  );
```

```{include} query-table-function-ordering.fragment
```

## Performance

The connector includes a number of performance improvements, detailed in the
following sections.

(mariadb-pushdown)=

### Pushdown

The connector supports pushdown for a number of operations:

- {ref}`join-pushdown`
- {ref}`limit-pushdown`
- {ref}`topn-pushdown`

{ref}`Aggregate pushdown <aggregation-pushdown>` for the following functions:

- {func}`avg`
- {func}`count`
- {func}`max`
- {func}`min`
- {func}`sum`
- {func}`stddev`
- {func}`stddev_pop`
- {func}`stddev_samp`
- {func}`variance`
- {func}`var_pop`
- {func}`var_samp`

```{include} pushdown-correctness-behavior.fragment
```

```{include} no-pushdown-text-type.fragment
```

Commit message:

Add docs for table stats with MariaDB

docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/mariadb.md, after:

---
myst:
  substitutions:
    default_domain_compaction_threshold: '`32`'
---

# MariaDB connector

```{raw} html
<img src="../_static/img/mariadb.png" class="connector-logo">
```

The MariaDB connector allows querying and creating tables in an external MariaDB
database.

## Requirements

To connect to MariaDB, you need:

- MariaDB version 10.2 or higher.
- Network access from the Trino coordinator and workers to MariaDB. Port
  3306 is the default port.

## Configuration

To configure the MariaDB connector, create a catalog properties file in
`etc/catalog` named, for example, `example.properties`, to mount the MariaDB
connector as the `example` catalog. Create the file with the following
contents, replacing the connection properties as appropriate for your setup:

```text
connector.name=mariadb
connection-url=jdbc:mariadb://example.net:3306
connection-user=root
connection-password=secret
```

The `connection-user` and `connection-password` are typically required and
determine the user credentials for the connection, often a service user. You can
use {doc}`secrets </security/secrets>` to avoid actual values in the catalog
properties files.

```{include} jdbc-authentication.fragment
```

```{include} jdbc-common-configurations.fragment
```

```{include} jdbc-domain-compaction-threshold.fragment
```

```{include} jdbc-case-insensitive-matching.fragment
```

```{include} non-transactional-insert.fragment
```

## Querying MariaDB

The MariaDB connector provides a schema for every MariaDB *database*.
You can see the available MariaDB databases by running `SHOW SCHEMAS`:

```
SHOW SCHEMAS FROM example;
```

If you have a MariaDB database named `web`, you can view the tables
in this database by running `SHOW TABLES`:

```
SHOW TABLES FROM example.web;
```

You can see a list of the columns in the `clicks` table in the `web`
database using either of the following:

```
DESCRIBE example.web.clicks;
SHOW COLUMNS FROM example.web.clicks;
```

Finally, you can access the `clicks` table in the `web` database:

```
SELECT * FROM example.web.clicks;
```

If you used a different name for your catalog properties file, use
that catalog name instead of `example` in the above examples.

% mariadb-type-mapping:

## Type mapping

Because Trino and MariaDB each support types that the other does not, this
connector {ref}`modifies some types <type-mapping-overview>` when reading or
writing data. Data types may not map the same way in both directions between
Trino and the data source. Refer to the following sections for type mapping in
each direction.

### MariaDB type to Trino type mapping

The connector maps MariaDB types to the corresponding Trino types according
to the following table:

```{eval-rst}
.. list-table:: MariaDB type to Trino type mapping
  :widths: 30, 30, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - MariaDB type
    - Trino type
    - Notes
  * - ``BOOLEAN``
    - ``TINYINT``
    - ``BOOL`` and ``BOOLEAN`` are aliases of ``TINYINT(1)``
  * - ``TINYINT``
    - ``TINYINT``
    -
  * - ``TINYINT UNSIGNED``
    - ``SMALLINT``
    -
  * - ``SMALLINT``
    - ``SMALLINT``
    -
  * - ``SMALLINT UNSIGNED``
    - ``INTEGER``
    -
  * - ``INT``
    - ``INTEGER``
    -
  * - ``INT UNSIGNED``
    - ``BIGINT``
    -
  * - ``BIGINT``
    - ``BIGINT``
    -
  * - ``BIGINT UNSIGNED``
    - ``DECIMAL(20, 0)``
    -
  * - ``FLOAT``
    - ``REAL``
    -
  * - ``DOUBLE``
    - ``DOUBLE``
    -
  * - ``DECIMAL(p,s)``
    - ``DECIMAL(p,s)``
    -
  * - ``CHAR(n)``
    - ``CHAR(n)``
    -
  * - ``TINYTEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR(255)``
    -
  * - ``TEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR(65535)``
    -
  * - ``MEDIUMTEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR(16777215)``
    -
  * - ``LONGTEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR``
    -
  * - ``VARCHAR(n)``
    - ``VARCHAR(n)``
    -
  * - ``TINYBLOB``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``BLOB``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``MEDIUMBLOB``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``LONGBLOB``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``VARBINARY(n)``
    - ``VARBINARY``
    -
  * - ``DATE``
    - ``DATE``
    -
  * - ``TIME(n)``
    - ``TIME(n)``
    -
  * - ``TIMESTAMP(n)``
    - ``TIMESTAMP(n)``
    - MariaDB stores the current timestamp by default. Enable
      `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp
      <https://mariadb.com/docs/reference/mdb/system-variables/explicit_defaults_for_timestamp/>`_
      to avoid implicit default values and use ``NULL`` as the default value.
```

No other types are supported.

### Trino type mapping to MariaDB type mapping

The connector maps Trino types to the corresponding MariaDB types according
to the following table:

```{eval-rst}
.. list-table:: Trino type mapping to MariaDB type mapping
  :widths: 30, 25, 50
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Trino type
    - MariaDB type
    - Notes
  * - ``BOOLEAN``
    - ``BOOLEAN``
    -
  * - ``TINYINT``
    - ``TINYINT``
    -
  * - ``SMALLINT``
    - ``SMALLINT``
    -
  * - ``INTEGER``
    - ``INT``
    -
  * - ``BIGINT``
    - ``BIGINT``
    -
  * - ``REAL``
    - ``FLOAT``
    -
  * - ``DOUBLE``
    - ``DOUBLE``
    -
  * - ``DECIMAL(p,s)``
    - ``DECIMAL(p,s)``
    -
  * - ``CHAR(n)``
    - ``CHAR(n)``
    -
  * - ``VARCHAR(255)``
    - ``TINYTEXT``
    - Maps on ``VARCHAR`` of length 255 or less.
  * - ``VARCHAR(65535)``
    - ``TEXT``
    - Maps on ``VARCHAR`` of length between 256 and 65535, inclusive.
  * - ``VARCHAR(16777215)``
    - ``MEDIUMTEXT``
    - Maps on ``VARCHAR`` of length between 65536 and 16777215, inclusive.
  * - ``VARCHAR``
    - ``LONGTEXT``
    - ``VARCHAR`` of length greater than 16777215 and unbounded ``VARCHAR`` map
      to ``LONGTEXT``.
  * - ``VARBINARY``
    - ``MEDIUMBLOB``
    -
  * - ``DATE``
    - ``DATE``
    -
  * - ``TIME(n)``
    - ``TIME(n)``
    -
  * - ``TIMESTAMP(n)``
    - ``TIMESTAMP(n)``
    - MariaDB stores the current timestamp by default. Enable
      `explicit_defaults_for_timestamp
      <https://mariadb.com/docs/reference/mdb/system-variables/explicit_defaults_for_timestamp/>`_
      to avoid implicit default values and use ``NULL`` as the default value.
```

No other types are supported.

Complete list of [MariaDB data types](https://mariadb.com/kb/en/data-types/).

```{include} jdbc-type-mapping.fragment
```

(mariadb-sql-support)=

## SQL support

The connector provides read access and write access to data and metadata in
a MariaDB database.  In addition to the {ref}`globally available
<sql-globally-available>` and {ref}`read operation <sql-read-operations>`
statements, the connector supports the following features:

- {doc}`/sql/insert`
- {doc}`/sql/update`
- {doc}`/sql/delete`
- {doc}`/sql/truncate`
- {doc}`/sql/create-table`
- {doc}`/sql/create-table-as`
- {doc}`/sql/drop-table`
- {doc}`/sql/alter-table`
- {doc}`/sql/create-schema`
- {doc}`/sql/drop-schema`

```{include} sql-update-limitation.fragment
```

```{include} sql-delete-limitation.fragment
```

## Table functions

The connector provides specific {doc}`table functions </functions/table>` to
access MariaDB.

(mariadb-query-function)=

### `query(varchar) -> table`

The `query` function allows you to query the underlying database directly. It
requires syntax native to MariaDB, because the full query is pushed down and
processed in MariaDB. This can be useful for accessing native features which are
not available in Trino or for improving query performance in situations where
running a query natively may be faster.

```{include} query-passthrough-warning.fragment
```

As an example, query the `example` catalog and select the age of employees by
using `TIMESTAMPDIFF` and `CURDATE`:

```
SELECT
  age
FROM
  TABLE(
    example.system.query(
      query => 'SELECT
        TIMESTAMPDIFF(
          YEAR,
          date_of_birth,
          CURDATE()
        ) AS age
      FROM
        tiny.employees'
    )
  );
```

```{include} query-table-function-ordering.fragment
```

## Performance

The connector includes a number of performance improvements, detailed in the
following sections.

(mariadb-table-statistics)=
### Table statistics

The MariaDB connector can use [table and column
statistics](/optimizer/statistics) for [cost based
optimizations](/optimizer/cost-based-optimizations) to improve query processing
performance based on the actual data in the data source.

The statistics are collected by MariaDB and retrieved by the connector.

To collect statistics for a table, execute the following statement in
MariaDB.

```text
ANALYZE TABLE table_name;
```

Refer to [MariaDB documentation](https://mariadb.com/kb/en/analyze-table/) for
additional information.

(mariadb-pushdown)=

### Pushdown

The connector supports pushdown for a number of operations:

- {ref}`join-pushdown`
- {ref}`limit-pushdown`
- {ref}`topn-pushdown`

{ref}`Aggregate pushdown <aggregation-pushdown>` for the following functions:

- {func}`avg`
- {func}`count`
- {func}`max`
- {func}`min`
- {func}`sum`
- {func}`stddev`
- {func}`stddev_pop`
- {func}`stddev_samp`
- {func}`variance`
- {func}`var_pop`
- {func}`var_samp`

```{include} pushdown-correctness-behavior.fragment
```

```{include} no-pushdown-text-type.fragment
```
