docs/src/main/sphinx/admin/properties-sql-environment.md, before:

# SQL environment properties

SQL environment properties allow you to globally configure parameters relevant
to all SQL queries and the context they are processed in.

## `sql.forced-session-time-zone`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Force the time zone for any query processing to the configured value, and
therefore override the time zone of the client. The time zone must be specified
as a string such as `UTC` or [other valid
values](timestamp-p-with-time-zone-data-type).

## `sql.default-catalog`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Set the default catalog for all clients. Any default catalog configuration
provided by a client overrides this default.

## `sql.default-schema`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Set the default schema for all clients. Must be set to a schema name that is
valid for the default catalog. Any default schema configuration provided by a
client overrides this default.

## `sql.default-function-catalog`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Set the default catalog for [SQL routine](/routines) storage for all clients.
The connector used in the catalog must support [](sql-routine-management). Any
usage of a fully qualified name for a routine overrides this default.

## `sql.default-function-schema`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Set the default schema for SQL routine storage for all clients. Must be set to a
schema name that is valid for the default function catalog. Any usage of a fully
qualified name for a routine overrides this default.

## `sql.path`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Define the default collection of paths to functions or table functions in
specific catalogs and schemas. Paths are specified as
`catalog_name.schema_name`. Multiple paths must be separated by commas. Find
more details about the path in [](/sql/set-path).

Commit message:

Add example for routine storage config

docs/src/main/sphinx/admin/properties-sql-environment.md, after:

# SQL environment properties

SQL environment properties allow you to globally configure parameters relevant
to all SQL queries and the context they are processed in.

## `sql.forced-session-time-zone`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Force the time zone for any query processing to the configured value, and
therefore override the time zone of the client. The time zone must be specified
as a string such as `UTC` or [other valid
values](timestamp-p-with-time-zone-data-type).

## `sql.default-catalog`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Set the default catalog for all clients. Any default catalog configuration
provided by a client overrides this default.

## `sql.default-schema`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Set the default schema for all clients. Must be set to a schema name that is
valid for the default catalog. Any default schema configuration provided by a
client overrides this default.

## `sql.default-function-catalog`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Set the default catalog for [SQL routine](/routines) storage for all clients.
The connector used in the catalog must support [](sql-routine-management). Any
usage of a fully qualified name for a routine overrides this default.

The default catalog and schema for SQL routine storage must be configured
together, and the resulting entry must be set as part of the path. For example,
the following example section for [](config-properties) uses the `functions`
schema in the `brain` catalog for routine storage, and adds it as the only entry
on the path:

```properties
sql.default-function-catalog=brain
sql.default-function-schema=default
sql.path=brain.default
```

## `sql.default-function-schema`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Set the default schema for SQL routine storage for all clients. Must be set to a
schema name that is valid for the default function catalog. Any usage of a fully
qualified name for a routine overrides this default.

## `sql.path`

- **Type:** [](prop-type-string)

Define the default collection of paths to functions or table functions in
specific catalogs and schemas. Paths are specified as
`catalog_name.schema_name`. Multiple paths must be separated by commas. Find
more details about the path in [](/sql/set-path).
