docs/src/main/sphinx/sql/create-table.md, before:

# CREATE TABLE

## Synopsis

```text
CREATE TABLE [ IF NOT EXISTS ]
table_name (
  { column_name data_type [ NOT NULL ]
      [ COMMENT comment ]
      [ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
  | LIKE existing_table_name
      [ { INCLUDING | EXCLUDING } PROPERTIES ]
  }
  [, ...]
)
[ COMMENT table_comment ]
[ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
```

## Description

Create a new, empty table with the specified columns.
Use {doc}`create-table-as` to create a table with data.

The optional `IF NOT EXISTS` clause causes the error to be
suppressed if the table already exists.

The optional `WITH` clause can be used to set properties
on the newly created table or on single columns.  To list all available table
properties, run the following query:

```
SELECT * FROM system.metadata.table_properties
```

To list all available column properties, run the following query:

```
SELECT * FROM system.metadata.column_properties
```

The `LIKE` clause can be used to include all the column definitions from
an existing table in the new table. Multiple `LIKE` clauses may be
specified, which allows copying the columns from multiple tables.

If `INCLUDING PROPERTIES` is specified, all of the table properties are
copied to the new table. If the `WITH` clause specifies the same property
name as one of the copied properties, the value from the `WITH` clause
will be used. The default behavior is `EXCLUDING PROPERTIES`. The
`INCLUDING PROPERTIES` option maybe specified for at most one table.

## Examples

Create a new table `orders`:

```
CREATE TABLE orders (
  orderkey bigint,
  orderstatus varchar,
  totalprice double,
  orderdate date
)
WITH (format = 'ORC')
```

Create the table `orders` if it does not already exist, adding a table comment
and a column comment:

```
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS orders (
  orderkey bigint,
  orderstatus varchar,
  totalprice double COMMENT 'Price in cents.',
  orderdate date
)
COMMENT 'A table to keep track of orders.'
```

Create the table `bigger_orders` using the columns from `orders`
plus additional columns at the start and end:

```
CREATE TABLE bigger_orders (
  another_orderkey bigint,
  LIKE orders,
  another_orderdate date
)
```

## See also

{doc}`alter-table`, {doc}`drop-table`, {doc}`create-table-as`, {doc}`show-create-table`

Commit message:

Add documentation for `CREATE OR REPLACE`

docs/src/main/sphinx/sql/create-table.md, after:

# CREATE TABLE

## Synopsis

```text
CREATE [ OR REPLACE ] TABLE [ IF NOT EXISTS ]
table_name (
  { column_name data_type [ NOT NULL ]
      [ COMMENT comment ]
      [ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
  | LIKE existing_table_name
      [ { INCLUDING | EXCLUDING } PROPERTIES ]
  }
  [, ...]
)
[ COMMENT table_comment ]
[ WITH ( property_name = expression [, ...] ) ]
```

## Description

Create a new, empty table with the specified columns.
Use {doc}`create-table-as` to create a table with data.

The optional `OR REPLACE` clause causes an existing table with the
specified name to be replaced with the new table definition. Support
for table replacement varies across connectors. Refer to the
connector documentation for details.

The optional `IF NOT EXISTS` clause causes the error to be
suppressed if the table already exists.

`OR REPLACE` and `IF NOT EXISTS` cannot be used together.

The optional `WITH` clause can be used to set properties
on the newly created table or on single columns.  To list all available table
properties, run the following query:

```
SELECT * FROM system.metadata.table_properties
```

To list all available column properties, run the following query:

```
SELECT * FROM system.metadata.column_properties
```

The `LIKE` clause can be used to include all the column definitions from
an existing table in the new table. Multiple `LIKE` clauses may be
specified, which allows copying the columns from multiple tables.

If `INCLUDING PROPERTIES` is specified, all of the table properties are
copied to the new table. If the `WITH` clause specifies the same property
name as one of the copied properties, the value from the `WITH` clause
will be used. The default behavior is `EXCLUDING PROPERTIES`. The
`INCLUDING PROPERTIES` option maybe specified for at most one table.

## Examples

Create a new table `orders`:

```
CREATE TABLE orders (
  orderkey bigint,
  orderstatus varchar,
  totalprice double,
  orderdate date
)
WITH (format = 'ORC')
```

Create the table `orders` if it does not already exist, adding a table comment
and a column comment:

```
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS orders (
  orderkey bigint,
  orderstatus varchar,
  totalprice double COMMENT 'Price in cents.',
  orderdate date
)
COMMENT 'A table to keep track of orders.'
```

Create the table `bigger_orders` using the columns from `orders`
plus additional columns at the start and end:

```
CREATE TABLE bigger_orders (
  another_orderkey bigint,
  LIKE orders,
  another_orderdate date
)
```

## See also

{doc}`alter-table`, {doc}`drop-table`, {doc}`create-table-as`, {doc}`show-create-table`
